Jupiter is the fifth planet from the Sun and the largest planet in the Solar System .
Jupiter is a giant planet with a mass one-thousandth of that of the Sun , but is two and a half times that of all the other planets in the Solar System combined .
Jupiter is a gas giant , along with Saturn ( Uranus and Neptune are ice giants ) .
Jupiter was known to astronomers of ancient times .
The Romans named The Romans after Jupiter god Jupiter .
When viewed from Earth , Jupiter can reach an apparent magnitude of 2.94 , bright enough to cast shadows , and making Jupiter on average the third-brightest object in the night sky after the Moon and Venus .
Jupiter is primarily composed of hydrogen with a quarter of its mass being helium , although helium only comprises about a tenth of the number of molecules .
helium may also have a rocky core of heavier elements , but like the other giant planets , Jupiter lacks a well-defined solid surface .
Because of Jupiter rapid rotation , the planet 's shape is that of an oblate spheroid ( it has a slight but noticeable bulge around the equator ) .
The outer atmosphere is visibly segregated into several bands at different latitudes , resulting in turbulence and storms along several bands at different latitudes interacting boundaries .
A prominent result is the Great Red Spot , a giant storm that is known to have existed since at least the 17th century when it was first seen by telescope .
Jupiter is a faint planetary ring system and a powerful magnetosphere .
Jupiter has at least 67 moons , including the four large Galilean moons discovered by Galileo Galilei in 1610 .
Ganymede , the largest of these , has a diameter greater than that of the planet Mercury .
Jupiter has been explored on several occasions by robotic spacecraft , most notably during the early Pioneer and Voyager flyby missions and later by the Galileo orbiter .
The most recent probe to visit Jupiter was the Pluto-bound New Horizons spacecraft in late February 2007 .
The probe used the gravity from Jupiter to increase The probe speed .
Future targets for exploration in the Jovian system include the possible ice-covered liquid ocean on the moon Europa .
A set of new super-Earths may have originally populated the inner Solar System .
Earth and A set of new super-Earths neighbor planets may have formed from fragments of planets after collisions with Jupiter destroyed new super-Earths near the Sun .
As Jupiter came toward the inner Solar System , in what theorists call the Grand Tack Hypothesis , gravitational tugs and pulls occurred causing a series of collisions between new super-Earths as their orbits began to overlap .
Astronomers have discovered nearly 500 planetary systems each with multiple planets , and typically these systems include a few planets with masses several times greater than Earth ( super-Earths ) , orbiting closer to their star than the planet Mercury is to the Sun , and Jupiter-like gas giants are also often found close to their star .
It appears that Jupiter is in its present orbit in the Solar System because Saturn pulled Jupiter out during Saturn migration .
Jupiter moving out of the inner Solar System would have allowed the formation of inner planets , including A set of new super-Earths .
Jupiter is composed primarily of gaseous and liquid matter .
Jupiter is the largest of the four giant planets in the Solar System and hence Jupiter largest planet .
Jupiter has a diameter of 142,984 km ( 88,846 mi ) at its equator .
The density of Jupiter , 1.326 g\/cm3 , is the second highest of the giant planets , but lower than those of the four terrestrial planets .
Jupiter upper atmosphere is composed of about 88 92 % hydrogen and 8 12 % helium by percent volume of gas molecules .
Because a helium atom has about four times as much mass as a hydrogen atom , the composition changes when described as the proportion of mass contributed by different atoms .
Thus , Jupiter atmosphere is approximately 75 % hydrogen and 24 % helium by mass , with the remaining one percent of mass consisting of other elements .
The interior contains denser materials , such that the distribution is roughly 71 % hydrogen , 24 % helium and 5 % other elements by mass .
The atmosphere contains trace amounts of methane , water vapor , ammonia , and silicon-based compounds .
The outermost layer of The atmosphere contains crystals of frozen ammonia .
Neon in The atmosphere only consists of 20 parts per million by mass , which is about a tenth as abundant as in the Sun .
Helium is also depleted , to about 80 % of the Sun helium composition .
This depletion is a result of precipitation of these elements into the interior of the planet .
Abundances of heavier inert gases in Jupiter atmosphere are about two to three times that of the Sun .
Based on spectroscopy , Saturn is thought to be similar in composition to Jupiter , but the other giant planets Uranus and Neptune have relatively much less hydrogen and helium .
Because of the lack of atmospheric entry probes , high-quality abundance numbers of these elements are lacking for the outer planets beyond Jupiter .
Jupiter mass is 2.5 times that of all the other planets in the Solar System combined this is so massive that its barycenter with the Sun lies above the Sun surface at 1.068 solar radii from the Sun center .
Although with a diameter 11 times that of A set of new super-Earths , it is much larger , it is considerably less dense .
Jupiter volume is that of about 1,321 Earths , but it is only 318 times as massive .
Jupiter radius is about 1\/10 the radius of the Sun , and its mass is 0.001 times the mass of the Sun , so the density of the two bodies is similar .
A '' its '' ( MJ or MJup ) is often used as a unit to describe masses of other objects , particularly extrasolar planets and brown dwarfs .
So , for example , the extrasolar planet HD 209458 b has a mass of 0.69 MJ , while Kappa Andromedae b has a mass of MJ .
Theoretical models indicate that if Jupiter had much more mass than Jupiter does at present , Jupiter would shrink .
For small changes in mass , the radius would not change appreciably , and above about 500 M ( 1.6 Jupiter masses ) The interior would become so much more compressed under the increased pressure that The interior volume would decrease despite the increasing amount of matter .
As a result , Jupiter is thought to have about as large a diameter as a planet of Jupiter composition and evolutionary history can achieve .
The process of further shrinkage with increasing mass would continue until appreciable stellar ignition is achieved as in high-mass brown dwarfs having around 50 Jupiter masses .
Although Jupiter would need to be about 75 times as massive to fuse hydrogen and become a star , the smallest red dwarf is only about 30 percent larger in radius than Jupiter .
Despite this , Jupiter still radiates more heat than Jupiter receives from the Sun ; the amount of heat produced inside Jupiter is similar to the total solar radiation Jupiter receives .
This additional heat is generated by the Kelvin Helmholtz mechanism through contraction .
This process causes Jupiter to shrink by about 2 cm each year .
When it was first formed , Jupiter was much hotter and was about twice Jupiter current diameter .
Jupiter is thought to consist of a dense core with a mixture of elements , a surrounding layer of liquid metallic hydrogen with some helium , and an outer layer predominantly of molecular hydrogen .
The core is often described as rocky , but The core detailed composition is unknown , as are the properties of materials at the temperatures and pressures of those depths ( see below ) .
In 1997 , the existence of The core was suggested by gravitational measurements , indicating a mass of from 12 to 45 times A set of new super-Earths mass or roughly 4 % 14 % of the total mass of Jupiter .
The presence of a core during at least part of Jupiter history is suggested by models of planetary formation that require the formation of a rocky or icy core massive enough to collect its bulk of hydrogen and helium from the protosolar nebula .
Assuming its did exist , its may have shrunk as convection currents of hot liquid metallic hydrogen mixed with the molten core and carried its contents to higher levels in the planetary interior .
The uncertainty of the models is tied to the error margin in hitherto measured parameters : one of the rotational coefficients ( J6 ) used to describe the planet 's gravitational moment , Jupiter equatorial radius , and its temperature at 1 bar pressure .
The Juno mission , which launched in August 2011 , is expected to better constrain the values of these parameters , and thereby make progress on the problem of The core .
The core region is surrounded by dense metallic hydrogen , which extends outward to about 78 % of the radius of the planet 's .
Rain-like droplets of helium and neon precipitate downward through this layer , depleting the abundance of these elements in The atmosphere .
Above this layer lies a transparent interior atmosphere of hydrogen .
At this depth , its is above its , which for hydrogen is only 33 K. In this state , there are no distinct liquid and gas phases hydrogen is said to be in a supercritical fluid state .
its is convenient to treat hydrogen as gas in the upper layer extending downward from this layer to a depth of about 1,000 km , and as liquid in deeper layers .
Physically , there is no clear boundary the gas smoothly becomes hotter and denser as one descends .
The temperature and pressure inside Jupiter increase steadily toward The core , due to the Kelvin Helmholtz mechanism .
At the '' surface '' pressure level of 10 bars , its is around 340 K ( 67 C ; 152 F ) .
At the phase transition region where hydrogen heated beyond its critical point becomes metallic , its is believed its is 10,000 K ( 9,700 C ; 17,500 F ) and the pressure is 200 GPa .
The temperature at the core boundary is estimated to be 36,000 K ( C ; 17,500 F ) and the pressure is roughly 3,000 4,500 GPa .
Jupiter has the largest planetary atmosphere in the Solar System , spanning over 5,000 km ( 3,107 mi ) in altitude .
As Jupiter has no surface , the base of its atmosphere is usually considered to be the point at which atmospheric pressure is equal to 1 MPa ( 10 bar ) , or ten times surface pressure on A set of new super-Earths .
Jupiter is perpetually covered with clouds composed of ammonia crystals and possibly ammonium hydrosulfide .
The clouds are located in the tropopause and are arranged into bands of different latitudes , known as tropical regions .
The zones have been observed to vary in width , color and intensity from year to year , but The zones have remained sufficiently stable for astronomers to give The zones identifying designations .
The cloud layer is only about 50 km ( 31 mi ) deep , and consists of at least two decks of clouds : a thick lower deck and a thin clearer region .
There may also be a thin layer of water clouds underlying The cloud layer , as evidenced by flashes of lightning detected in the atmosphere of Jupiter .
These electrical discharges can be up to a thousand times as powerful as lightning on A set of new super-Earths .
The clouds can form thunderstorms driven by the heat rising from The interior .
The orange and brown coloration in The clouds are caused by upwelling compounds that change color when they are exposed to ultraviolet light from the Sun .
These colorful compounds , known as chromophores , mix with the warmer , lower deck of clouds .
The zones are formed when rising convection cells form crystallizing ammonia that masks out these lower clouds from view .
Jupiter low axial tilt means that the poles constantly receive less solar radiation than at the planet 's equatorial region .
Convection within the interior of the planet transports more energy to the poles , balancing out the temperatures at The cloud layer .
The best known feature of Jupiter is the Great Red Spot , a persistent anticyclonic storm that is larger than A set of new super-Earths , located 22 south of the equator .
It is known to have been in existence since at least 1831 , and possibly since 1665 .
Images by the Hubble Space Telescope have shown as many as two '' red spots '' adjacent to the Great Red Spot .
The storm is large enough to be visible through Earth-based telescopes with an aperture of 12 cm or larger .
Mathematical models suggest that The storm is stable and may be a permanent feature of the planet 's .
the Great Red Spot dimensions are 24 40,000 km 12 14,000 km .
It is large enough to contain two or three planets of A set of new super-Earths diameter .
The maximum altitude of The storm is about 8 km ( 5 mi ) above the surrounding cloudtops .
Jupiter also has white ovals and brown ovals , which are lesser unnamed storms .
white ovals tend to consist of relatively cool clouds within The atmosphere .
white ovals are warmer and located within the '' normal cloud layer '' .
Even before Voyager proved that It was a storm , there was strong evidence that the spot could not be associated with any deeper feature on the planet 's surface , as the Great Red Spot rotates differentially with respect to the rest of The atmosphere , sometimes faster and sometimes more slowly .
During the Great Red Spot recorded history the Great Red Spot has traveled several times around the planet relative to any possible fixed rotational marker below the Great Red Spot .
In 2000 , an atmospheric feature formed in the southern hemisphere that is similar in appearance to the Great Red Spot , but smaller .
an atmospheric feature was named Oval BA , and has been nicknamed Red Spot Junior .
an atmospheric feature has since increased in intensity and changed color from white to red .
Jupiter has a faint planetary ring system composed of three main segments : an inner torus of particles known as the halo , a relatively bright main ring , and an outer gossamer ring .
These rings appear to be made of dust , rather than ice as with Saturn rings .
an outer gossamer ring is probably made of material ejected from the satellites Adrastea and Metis .
Material that would normally fall back to the moon is pulled into Jupiter because of Jupiter strong gravitational influence .
The orbit of the material veers towards Jupiter and new material is added by additional impacts .
In a similar way , the moons Thebe and Amalthea probably produce the two distinct components of an outer gossamer ring .
There is also evidence of a rocky ring strung along Amalthea orbit which may consist of collisional debris from the moon .
Jupiter magnetic field is 14 times as strong as A set of new super-Earths , ranging from 4.2 gauss ( 0.42 mT ) at the equator to 10 14 gauss ( 1.0 1.4 mT ) at the poles , making it the strongest in the Solar System ( except for sunspots ) .
This field is believed to be generated by eddy currents swirling movements of conducting materials within The core .
The volcanoes on the moon Io emit large amounts of sulfur dioxide forming a gas torus along the moon orbit .
the gas is ionized in the magnetosphere producing sulfur and oxygen ions .
the gas , together with hydrogen ions originating from the atmosphere of Jupiter , form a plasma sheet in Jupiter equatorial plane .
The plasma in the sheet co-rotates with the planet causing deformation of the dipole magnetic field into that of magnetodisk .
Electrons within the sheet generate a strong radio signature that produces bursts in the range of 0.6 30 MHz .
At about 75 Jupiter radii from the planet 's , the interaction of the magnetosphere with the solar wind generates a bow shock .
Jupiter magnetosphere is a magnetopause , located at the inner edge of a magnetosheath a region between it and a bow shock .
the solar wind interacts with these regions , elongating it on Jupiter lee side and extending it outward until the solar wind nearly reaches the orbit of Saturn .
The four largest moons of Jupiter all orbit within it , which protects them from the solar wind .
it is responsible for intense episodes of radio emission from the planet 's polar regions .
Volcanic activity on the Jovian moon Io ( see below ) injects gas into Jupiter magnetosphere , producing a torus of particles about the planet 's .
As the moon Io moves through this torus , the interaction generates Alfv n waves that carry ionized matter into the polar regions of Jupiter .
When A set of new super-Earths intersects this cone , the radio emissions from Jupiter can exceed the solar radio output .
Jupiter is the only planet that has a barycenter with the Sun that lies outside the volume of the Sun , though by only 7 % of the Sun radius .
The average distance between Jupiter and the Sun is 778 million km ( about 5.2 times the average distance from A set of new super-Earths to the Sun , or 5.2 AU ) and it completes an orbit every 11.86 years .
This is two-fifths the orbital period of Saturn , forming a 5:2 orbital resonance between the two largest planets in the Solar System .
its is inclined 1.31 compared to A set of new super-Earths .
Because of an eccentricity of 0.048 , the distance from Jupiter and the Sun varies by 75 million km between perihelion and aphelion , or the nearest and most distant points of the planet along the orbital path respectively .
The axial tilt of Jupiter is relatively small : only 3.13 .
As a result , The axial tilt of Jupiter does not experience significant seasonal changes , in contrast to , for example , A set of new super-Earths and Mars .
Jupiter rotation is the fastest of all the Solar System 's planets , completing a rotation on its axis in slightly less than ten hours ; this creates an equatorial bulge easily seen through an Earth-based amateur telescope .
the planet 's is shaped as an oblate spheroid , meaning that the diameter across its equator is longer than the diameter measured between its poles .
On Jupiter , the diameter across its equator is 9,275 km ( 5,763 mi ) longer than the diameter measured through its .
Because Jupiter is not a solid body , its upper atmosphere undergoes differential rotation .
The rotation of Jupiter polar atmosphere is about 5 minutes longer than that of its ; three systems are used as frames of reference , particularly when graphing the motion of atmospheric features .
the inner Solar System I applies from the latitudes 10 N to 10 S ; its period is the planet 's shortest , at 9h 50m 30.0 s .
System II applies at all latitudes north and south of these ; its period is 9h 55m 40.6 s .
System II was first defined by radio astronomers , and corresponds to the rotation of the planet 's magnetosphere ; its period is Jupiter official rotation .
Jupiter is usually the fourth brightest object in the sky ( after the Sun , the Moon and Venus and Venus ) ; at times Mars appears brighter than Jupiter .
Depending on Jupiter position with respect to A set of new super-Earths , Jupiter can vary in visual magnitude from as bright as 2.9 at opposition down to 1.6 during conjunction with the Sun .
the diameter across its equator likewise varies from 50.1 to 29.8 arc seconds .
Favorable oppositions occur when Jupiter is passing through perihelion , an event that occurs once per orbit .
As Jupiter approached perihelion in March 2011 , there was a favorable opposition in September 2010 .
A set of new super-Earths overtakes Jupiter every 398.9 days as A set of new super-Earths orbits the Sun , a duration called the synodic period .
As A set of new super-Earths does so , Jupiter appears to undergo retrograde motion with respect to the background stars .
That is , for a period Jupiter seems to move backward in the night sky , performing a looping motion .
Jupiter 12-year orbital period corresponds to the dozen astrological signs of the zodiac , and may have been the historical origin of the signs .
That is , Jupiter reaches opposition Jupiter has advanced eastward by about 30 , the width of a zodiac sign .
Because its is outside A set of new super-Earths , the phase angle of Jupiter as viewed from A set of new super-Earths never exceeds 11.5 .
That is , the planet 's always appears nearly fully illuminated when viewed through Earth-based telescopes .
the planet 's was only during spacecraft missions to Jupiter that crescent views of the planet 's were obtained .
A small telescope will usually show Jupiter four Galilean moons and the prominent cloud belts across Jupiter atmosphere .
A small telescope will show Jupiter Great Red Spot when A small telescope faces A set of new super-Earths .
The observation of Jupiter dates back to the Babylonian astronomers of the 7th or 8th century BC .
The Chinese historian of astronomy , Xi Zezong , has claimed that Gan De , a Chinese astronomer , made the discovery of one of Jupiter moons in 362 BC with the unaided eye .
If accurate , this would predate Galileo discovery by nearly two millennia .
In his 2nd century work the Almagest , the Hellenistic astronomer Claudius Ptolemaeus constructed a geocentric planetary model based on deferents and epicycles to explain Jupiter motion relative to A set of new super-Earths , giving Jupiter orbital period around A set of new super-Earths as 4332.38 days , or 11.86 years .
In 499 , Aryabhata , a mathematician astronomer from the classical age of Indian mathematics and astronomy , also used a geocentric model to estimate Jupiter period as 4332.2722 days , or 11.86 years .
In 1610 , Galileo Galilei discovered the four largest moons of Jupiter Io , Europa , Ganymede and Callisto ( now known as the Galilean moons ) using a telescope ; thought to be the first telescopic observation of moons other than A set of new super-Earths .
Galileo was also the first discovery of a celestial motion not apparently centered on A set of new super-Earths .
Galileo was a major point in favor of Copernicus ' heliocentric theory of the motions of the planets ; Galileo outspoken support of the Copernican theory placed Copernicus ' under the threat of the Inquisition .
During the 1660s , Cassini used a new telescope to discover spots and colorful bands on Jupiter and observed that the planet 's appeared oblate ; that is , flattened at its .
Copernicus ' was also able to estimate the rotation period of the planet 's .
In 1690 Cassini noticed that The atmosphere undergoes differential rotation .
The Great Red Spot , a prominent oval-shaped feature in the southern hemisphere of Jupiter , may have been observed as early as 1664 by Robert Hooke and in 1665 by Giovanni Cassini , although this is disputed .
The pharmacist Heinrich Schwabe produced the earliest known drawing to show details of the Great Red Spot in 1831 .
The Red Spot was reportedly lost from sight on several occasions between 1665 and 1708 before becoming quite conspicuous in 1878 .
The Red Spot was recorded as fading again in 1883 and at the start of the 20th century .
Both Giovanni Borelli and Cassini made careful tables of the motions of the Jovian moons , allowing predictions of the times when the Jovian moons would pass before or behind the planet 's .
By the 1670s , it was observed that when Jupiter was on the opposite side of the Sun from A set of new super-Earths , these events would occur about 17 minutes later than expected .
Ole R mer deduced that sight is not instantaneous ( a conclusion that Cassini had earlier rejected ) , and this timing discrepancy was used to estimate the speed of light .
In 1892 , E. E. Barnard observed a fifth satellite of Jupiter with the 36-inch ( 910 mm ) refractor at Lick Observatory in California .
The discovery of this relatively small object , a testament to E. E. Barnard keen eyesight , quickly made E. E. Barnard famous .
the moon was later named Amalthea .
the moon was the last planetary moon to be discovered directly by visual observation .
In 1932 , Rupert Wildt identified absorption bands of ammonia and methane in the spectra of Jupiter .
Three long-lived anticyclonic features termed white ovals were observed in 1938 .
For several decades Three long-lived anticyclonic features remained as separate features in The atmosphere , sometimes approaching each other but never merging .
Finally , two of white ovals merged in 1998 , then absorbed the third in 2000 , becoming Oval BA .
In 1955 , Bernard Burke and Kenneth Franklin detected bursts of radio signals coming from Jupiter at 22.2 MHz .
The period of bursts of radio signals matched the rotation of the planet 's , and Bernard Burke and Kenneth Franklin were also able to use this information to refine the rotation rate .
Radio bursts from Jupiter were found to come in two forms : long bursts ( or L-bursts ) lasting up to several seconds , and short bursts ( or S-bursts ) that had a duration of less than a hundredth of a second .
Scientists discovered that there were three forms of radio signals transmitted from Jupiter .
Decametric radio bursts ( with a wavelength of tens of meters ) vary with the rotation of Jupiter , and are influenced by interaction of the moon Io with Jupiter magnetic field .
The origin of this signal was from a torus-shaped belt around Jupiter equator .
this signal is caused by cyclotron radiation from electrons that are accelerated in Jupiter magnetic field .
Thermal radiation is produced by heat in the atmosphere of Jupiter .
Since 1973 a number of automated spacecraft have visited Jupiter , most notably the Pioneer 10 space probe , the first spacecraft to get close enough to Jupiter to send back revelations about the properties and phenomena of the Solar System largest planet .
Flights to other planets within the Solar System are accomplished at a cost in energy , which is described by the net change in velocity of automated spacecraft , or delta - v. Entering a Hohmann transfer orbit from A set of new super-Earths to Jupiter from low Earth orbit requires a delta-v of 6.3 km\/s which is comparable to the 9.7 km\/s delta-v needed to reach low Earth orbit .
Fortunately , gravity assists through planetary flybys can be used to reduce the energy required to reach Jupiter , albeit at the cost of a significantly longer flight duration .
Beginning in 1973 , several spacecraft have performed planetary flyby maneuvers that brought several spacecraft within observation range of Jupiter .
The Pioneer missions obtained the first close-up images of Jupiter atmosphere and several of its moons .
The Pioneer missions discovered that the radiation fields near the planet 's were much stronger than expected , but several spacecraft managed to survive in that environment .
The trajectories of several spacecraft were used to refine the mass estimates of the Jovian system .
Radio occultations by the planet 's resulted in better measurements of Jupiter diameter and the amount of polar flattening .
Six years later , The Pioneer missions vastly improved the understanding of the Galilean moons and discovered Jupiter rings .
They also confirmed that the Great Red Spot was anticyclonic .
Comparison of images showed that The Red Spot had changed hue since The Pioneer missions , turning from orange to dark brown .
A torus of ionized atoms was discovered along the moon Io orbital path , and volcanoes were found on the moon surface , some in the process of erupting .
As automated spacecraft passed behind the planet 's , automated spacecraft observed flashes of lightning in the night side atmosphere .
The next mission to encounter Jupiter , the Ulysses solar probe , performed a flyby maneuver to attain a polar orbit around the Sun .
During this pass automated spacecraft conducted studies on Jupiter magnetosphere .
Since Ulysses has no cameras , no images were taken .
In 2000 , The probe , en route to Saturn , flew by Jupiter and provided some of the highest-resolution images ever made of the planet 's .
On December 19 , 2000 , automated spacecraft captured an image of the moon Himalia , but the resolution was too low to show surface details .
The probe , en route to Pluto , flew by Jupiter for gravity assist .
The probe closest approach was on February 28 , 2007 .
The probe cameras measured plasma output from volcanoes on the moon Io and studied all four Galilean moons in detail , as well as making long-distance observations of all four Galilean moons Himalia and Elara .
Imaging of the Jovian system began September 4 , 2006 .
So far the only spacecraft to Jupiter is the Galileo orbiter , which went into orbit around Jupiter on December 7 , 1995 .
It orbited the planet 's for over seven years , conducting multiple flybys of all the Galilean moons and Amalthea .
automated spacecraft also witnessed the impact of Comet Shoemaker Levy 9 as automated spacecraft approached Jupiter in 1994 , giving a unique vantage point for the event .
While the information gained about the Jovian system from Galileo was extensive , its originally designed capacity was limited by the failed deployment of its high-gain radio transmitting antenna .
A 340-kilogram titanium atmospheric probe was released from automated spacecraft in July 1995 , entering Jupiter atmosphere on December 7 .
A 340-kilogram titanium atmospheric probe parachuted through 150 km ( 93 mi ) of The atmosphere at speed of about 2,575 km\/h ( 1600 mph ) and collected data for 57.6 minutes before it was crushed by the pressure ( about 23 times Earth normal , at a temperature of California ) .
The Galileo orbiter itself experienced a more rapid version of the same fate when The Galileo orbiter itself was deliberately steered into the planet on September 21 , 2003 , at a speed of over 50 km\/s , to avoid any possibility of The Galileo orbiter itself crashing into and possibly contaminating the moon Europa a moon which has been hypothesized to have the possibility of harboring life .
Data from this mission revealed that hydrogen composes up to 90 % of Jupiter atmosphere .
NASA has a mission underway to study Jupiter in detail from a polar orbit .
Named Juno , automated spacecraft launched in August 2011 , and will arrive in late 2016 .
The next planned mission to the Jovian system will be the European Space Agency 's Jupiter Icy Moon Explorer ( JUICE ) , due to launch in 2022 , followed by NASA Europa Clipper mission in 2025 .
Because of the possibility of subsurface liquid oceans on Jupiter moons Europa , Ganymede and Callisto , there has been great interest in studying the icy moons in detail .
NASA JIMO ( Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter ) was cancelled in 2005 .
A subsequent proposal for a joint NASA\/ESA mission , called EJSM\/Laplace , was developed with a provisional launch date around 2020 .
EJSM\/Laplace would have consisted of the NASA-led Jupiter Europa Orbiter , and the ESA-led Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter .
However by April 2011 , the ESA-led Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter had formally ended the partnership citing budget issues at NASA and the consequences on the mission timetable .
Instead the ESA-led Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter planned to go ahead with a European-only mission to compete in the ESA-led Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter L1 Cosmic Vision selection .
Jupiter has 67 natural satellites .
The four largest moons , visible from Earth with binoculars on a clear night , known as the '' Galilean moons '' , are the moon Io , Europa , Ganymede , and Callisto .
The orbits of the moon Io , Europa , and Ganymede , some of the largest satellites in the Solar System , form a pattern known as a Laplace resonance ; for every four orbits that the moon Io makes around Jupiter , the moon Europa makes exactly two orbits and Ganymede makes exactly one .
a Laplace resonance causes the gravitational effects of the three large moons to distort their orbits into elliptical shapes , since the moon receives an extra tug from a Laplace resonance neighbors at the same point in every orbit a Laplace resonance makes .
The tidal force from Jupiter , on the other hand , works to circularize their orbits .
The eccentricity of their orbits causes regular flexing of the three large moons shapes , with Jupiter gravity stretching them out as them approach Jupiter and allowing them to spring back to more spherical shapes as them swing away .
This tidal flexing heats the three large moons interiors by friction .
This is seen most dramatically in the extraordinary volcanic activity of innermost Io ( which is subject to the strongest tidal forces ) , and to a lesser degree in the geological youth of the moon Europa surface ( indicating recent resurfacing of the moon exterior ) .
Before the discoveries of The Pioneer missions , Jupiter moons were arranged neatly into four groups of four , based on commonality of their orbital elements .
Since then , the large number of new small outer moons has complicated this picture .
A basic sub-division is a grouping of the eight inner regular moons , which have nearly circular orbits near the plane of Jupiter equator and are believed to have formed with Jupiter .
The remainder of new small outer moons consist of an unknown number of small irregular moons with elliptical and inclined orbits , which are believed to be captured asteroids or fragments of captured asteroids .
Along with the Sun , the gravitational influence of Jupiter has helped shape the Solar System .
The orbits of most of the Solar System planets lie closer to Jupiter orbital plane than the Sun equatorial plane ( the planet Mercury is the only planet that is closer to the Sun equator in orbital tilt ) , the Kirkwood gaps in the asteroid belt are mostly caused by Jupiter , and the planet 's may have been responsible for the Late Heavy Bombardment of the Solar System history .
Along with its moons , Jupiter gravitational field controls numerous asteroids that have settled into the regions of the Lagrangian points preceding and following Jupiter in its orbit around the Sun .
These are known as the Trojan asteroids , and are divided into Greek and Trojan '' camps '' to commemorate the Iliad .
Most short-period comets belong to the Jupiter family defined as comets with semi-major axes smaller than Jupiter .
Jupiter family comets are believed to form in the Kuiper belt outside its .
During close encounters with Jupiter their orbits are perturbed into a smaller period and then circularized by regular gravitational interaction with the Sun and Jupiter .
Jupiter has been called the Solar System vacuum cleaner , because of Jupiter immense gravity well and location near the inner Solar System .
Jupiter receives the most frequent comet impacts of the Solar System planets .
Jupiter was thought that the planet 's served to partially shield the Solar System from cometary bombardment .
Recent computer simulations suggest that Jupiter does not cause a net decrease in the number of comets that pass through the inner Solar System , as its gravity perturbs their orbits inward in roughly the same numbers that its accretes or ejects Recent computer simulations .
This topic remains controversial among astronomers , as some believe This topic draws comets towards A set of new super-Earths from the Kuiper belt while others believe that Jupiter protects A set of new super-Earths from the alleged Oort cloud .
Jupiter experiences about 200 times more asteroid and comet impacts than A set of new super-Earths .
A 1997 survey of historical astronomical drawings suggested that Cassini may have recorded an impact scar in 1690 .
The survey determined eight other candidate observations had low or no possibilities of an impact .
A fireball was photographed by Voyager 1 during A fireball Jupiter encounter in March 1979 .
During the period July 16 , 1994 , to July 22 , 1994 , over 20 fragments from the comet Shoemaker Levy 9 ( SL9 , formally designated D\/1993 F2 ) collided with Jupiter southern hemisphere , providing the first direct observation of a collision between two the inner Solar System objects .
an impact provided useful data on the composition of Jupiter atmosphere .
This impact left behind a black spot in Jupiter atmosphere , similar in size to Oval BA .
Infrared observation showed a bright spot where an impact took place , meaning an impact warmed up the lower atmosphere in the area near Jupiter south pole .
A fireball , smaller than the previous observed impacts , was detected on June 3 , 2010 , by Anthony Wesley , an amateur astronomer in Australia , and was later discovered to have been captured on video by another amateur astronomer in the Philippines .
Yet another fireball was seen on August 20 , 2010 .
On September 10 , 2012 , another fireball was detected .
In 1953 , the Miller Urey experiment demonstrated that a combination of lightning and the chemical compounds that existed in the atmosphere of A set of new super-Earths could form organic compounds ( including amino acids ) that could serve as the building blocks of life .
The simulated atmosphere included water , methane , ammonia , and molecular hydrogen ; all molecules still found in Jupiter atmosphere .
Jupiter atmosphere has a strong vertical air circulation , which would carry these compounds down into the lower regions .
The higher temperatures within the interior of the atmosphere break down these chemicals , which would hinder the formation of Earth-like life .
It is considered highly unlikely that there is any Earth-like life on Jupiter , because there is only a small amount of water in Jupiter atmosphere and any possible solid surface deep within Jupiter would be under extreme pressures .
In 1976 , before The Pioneer missions , it was hypothesized that ammonia - or water-based life could evolve in Jupiter upper atmosphere .
The possible presence of underground oceans on some of Jupiter moons has led to speculation that the presence of life is more likely there .
Jupiter has been known since ancient times .
Jupiter is visible to the naked eye in the night sky and can occasionally be seen in the daytime when the Sun is low .
To the Babylonians , this object represented the Babylonians god Marduk .
the Babylonians used Jupiter roughly 12-year orbit along the ecliptic to define the constellations of the Babylonians zodiac .
The Romans named it after Jupiter ( Latin : Iuppiter , I piter ) ( also called Jove ) , the principal god of Roman mythology , whose name comes from the Proto-Indo-European vocative compound \* Dy u-p ter ( nominative : \* Dy us-p t r , meaning '' O Father Sky-God '' , or '' O Father Day-God '' ) .
In turn , Jupiter was the counterpart to the mythical Greek Zeus ( ) , also referred to as Dias ( ) , the planetary name of which is retained in modern Greek .
The astronomical symbol for the planet 's , , is a stylized representation of the god 's lightning bolt .
the mythical Greek Zeus supplies the root zeno - , used to form some Jupiter-related words , such as zenographic .
Jovian is the adjectival form of Jupiter .
The older adjectival form jovial , employed by astrologers in the Middle Ages , has come to mean '' happy '' or '' merry , '' moods ascribed to Jupiter astrological influence .
The Chinese , Korean and Japanese referred to the planet as the '' wood star '' ( Chinese : ; pinyin : m x ng ) , based on the Chinese Five Elements .
Chinese Taoism personified Chinese Taoism as wood star .
The Greeks called Chinese Taoism , Phaethon , '' blazing . ''
In Vedic Astrology , Hindu astrologers named the planet 's after Brihaspati , the religious teacher of the gods , and often called the planet 's '' Guru '' , which literally means the '' Heavy One . ''
In the English language , Thursday is derived from '' Thor 's day '' , with Thor in Germanic mythology being the equivalent Germanic god to the Roman god Jupiter ( mythology ) .
The Roman day Jovis was renamed Thursday .
In the Central Asian-Turkic myths , Jupiter called as a '' Erendiz\/Erent z '' , which means '' eren ( ?
) + yultuz ( star ) '' .
Also , these peoples calculated the period of its as 11 years and 300 days . 