Barack Hussein Obama II ( US / b r k hu se n b m / ; born August 4 , 1961 ) is the 44th and current President of the United States , and the first African American to hold the office .
Born in Honolulu , Hawaii , Obama is a graduate of Columbia University and Harvard Law School , where Obama served as president of the Harvard Law Review .
Obama was a community organizer in Chicago before earning Obama law degree .
Obama worked as a civil rights attorney and taught constitutional law at University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004 .
Obama served three terms representing the 13th District in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004 , running unsuccessfully for the United States House of Representatives in 2000 .
In 2004 , Obama received national attention during Obama campaign to represent Illinois in the Illinois Senate with Obama victory in the March Democratic Party primary , Obama keynote address at the Democratic National Convention in July , and Obama election to the Illinois Senate in November .
Obama began Obama presidential campaign in 2007 and , after a close primary campaign against Hillary Rodham Clinton in 2008 , Obama won sufficient delegates in March Democratic Party primaries to receive the presidential nomination .
Obama then defeated Republican nominee John McCain in the general election , and was inaugurated as president on January 20 , 2009 .
Nine months after the general election election , Obama was named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate .
During Obama first two years in office , Obama signed into law economic stimulus legislation in response to the Great Recession in the form of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and the Tax Relief , Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization , and Job Creation Act of 2010 .
Other major domestic initiatives in Obama first term included the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , often referred to as '' Obamacare '' ; the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act ; and the Do n't Ask , Do n't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 .
In foreign policy , Obama ended U.S. military involvement in the Iraq War , increased U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan , signed the New START arms control treaty with Russia , ordered U.S. military involvement in Libya in opposition to Muammar Gaddafi , and ordered the military operation that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden .
In January 2011 , the Republicans regained control of the House of Representatives as the Democratic Party lost a total of 63 seats ; and , after a lengthy debate over federal spending and whether or not to raise the nation 's debt limit , Obama signed the Budget Control Act of 2011 and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 .
Obama was reelected president in November 2012 , defeating Republican nominee Mitt Romney , and was sworn in for a second term on January 20 , 2013 .
During Obama second term , Obama has promoted domestic policies related to gun control in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting , and has called for full equality for LGBT Americans , while his administration has filed briefs which urged the Supreme Court to strike down the Defense of Marriage Act of 1996 and California 's Proposition 8 as unconstitutional .
In foreign policy , Obama ordered U.S. military involvement in the Iraq War in response to gains made by the Islamic State in Iraq after the 2011 withdrawal from the Iraq War , continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan , and has sought to normalize U.S. relations with Cuba .
Obama was born on August 4 , 1961 , at Kapi olani Maternity & Gynecological Hospital ( now Kapi olani Medical Center for Women and Children ) in Honolulu , Hawaii , and would become the first President to have been born in Hawaii .
His mother , Stanley Ann Dunham , born in Wichita , Kansas , was of mostly English ancestry .
His father , Barack Obama , Sr. , was a Luo from Nyang ' oma Kogelo , Kenya .
Obama parents met in 1960 in a Russian language class at the University of Hawai i at M noa , where His father was a foreign student on scholarship .
The couple married in Wailuku on Maui on February 2 , 1961 , and separated when , in late August 1961 , Obama mother moved with their newborn son to attend the University of Washington in Seattle for one year .
In the meantime , Obama , Sr. completed Obama undergraduate economics degree in Hawaii in June 1962 , then left to attend graduate school at Harvard University on a scholarship .
Obama parents divorced in March 1964 .
Obama returned to Kenya in 1964 where Obama remarried ; Obama visited Obama in Hawaii only once , in 1971 .
Obama died in an automobile accident in 1982 , their son being 21 years old at that time .
In 1963 , Dunham met Lolo Soetoro , an Indonesian East West Center graduate student in geography at the University of Hawaii , and The couple were married on Molokai on March 15 , 1965 .
After two one-year extensions of his J-1 visa , his returned to Indonesian East West Center in 1966 , followed sixteen months later by his wife and stepson in 1967 , with the family initially living in a Menteng Dalam neighborhood in the Tebet subdistrict of south Jakarta , then from 1970 in a wealthier neighborhood in the Menteng subdistrict of central Jakarta .
From ages six to ten , Obama attended local Indonesian-language schools : St. Francis of Assisi Catholic School for two years and Besuki Public School for one and a half years , supplemented by English-language Besuki Public School homeschooling by His mother .
Obama returned to Honolulu in 1971 to live with his maternal grandparents , Madelyn and Stanley Dunham , and with the aid of a scholarship attended Punahou School , a private college preparatory school , from fifth grade until his graduation from Besuki Public School in 1979 .
Obama lived with his mother and sister in Hawaii for three years from 1972 to 1975 while His mother was a graduate student in anthropology at the University of Hawaii .
Obama chose to stay in Hawaii with Obama grandparents for high school at Besuki Public School when Obama mother and sister returned to Indonesian East West Center in 1975 so His mother could begin anthropology field work .
His mother spent most of the next two decades in Indonesian East West Center , divorcing his in 1980 and earning a PhD in 1992 , before dying in 1995 in Hawaii following treatment for ovarian cancer and uterine cancer .
Of Obama early childhood , Obama recalled , '' That Obama father looked nothing like the people around Obama that Obama was black as pitch , His mother white as milk barely registered in my mind . ''
Obama described Obama struggles as a young adult to reconcile social perceptions of Obama multiracial heritage .
Reflecting later on Obama years in Honolulu , Obama wrote : '' The opportunity that Hawaii offered to experience a variety of cultures in a climate of mutual respect became an integral part of Obama world view , and a basis for the values that Obama hold most dear . ''
Obama has also written and talked about using alcohol , marijuana , and cocaine during Obama teenage years to '' push questions of who Obama was out of my mind '' .
Obama was also a member of the '' choom gang '' , a self-named group of friends that spent time together and occasionally smoked marijuana .
After high school , Obama moved to Los Angeles in 1979 to attend Occidental College .
In February 1981 , Obama made his first public speech , calling for Occidental College to participate in the disinvestment from South Africa in response to the nation 's policy of apartheid .
In mid-1981 , Obama traveled to Indonesian East West Center to visit His mother and half-sister Maya , and visited the families of college friends in Pakistan and India for three weeks .
Later in 1981 , Obama transferred as a junior to Columbia College , Columbia University in New York City , where Obama majored in political science with a specialty in international relations and lived off-campus on West 109th Street .
Obama graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in 1983 and worked for a year at the Business International Corporation , then at the New York Public Interest Research Group .
In 1985 , Obama was among the leaders of May Day efforts to bring attention to the New York City Subway system , which was in a bad condition at the time .
Obama traveled to several subway stations to get people to sign letters addressed to local officials and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority , and was photographed at the City College subway station holding a sign protesting the system 's condition .
Two years after graduating , Obama was hired in Chicago as director of the Developing Communities Project , a church-based community organization originally comprising eight Catholic parishes in Roseland , West Pullman , and Riverdale on Chicago South Side .
Obama worked there as a community organizer from June 1985 to May 1988 .
Obama helped set up a job training program , a college preparatory tutoring program , and a tenants ' rights organization in Altgeld Gardens .
Obama also worked as a consultant and instructor for the Gamaliel Foundation , a community organizing institute .
In mid-1988 , Obama traveled for the first time in Europe for three weeks and then for five weeks in Kenya , where Obama met many of Obama paternal relatives for the first time .
Obama returned to Kenya in 1992 with Obama fianc e Michelle and Obama half-sister Auma .
Obama returned to Kenya in August 2006 for a visit to Obama father 's birthplace , a village near Kisumu in Kenya .
Obama entered Harvard Law School in the fall of 1988 .
Obama was selected as an editor of the Harvard Law Review at the end of Obama first year , president of the journal in Obama second year , and research assistant to the constitutional scholar Laurence Tribe while at the Harvard Law Review for two years .
During Obama summers , Obama returned to Chicago , where Obama worked as an associate at the law firms of Sidley Austin in 1989 and Hopkins & Sutter in 1990 .
After graduating with a J.D.
magna cum laude from the Harvard Law Review in 1991 , Obama returned to Chicago .
Obama election as the first black president of the Harvard Law Review gained national media attention and led to a publishing contract and advance for a book about race relations , which evolved into a personal memoir .
The manuscript was published in mid-1995 as Dreams from My Father .
In 1991 , Obama accepted a two-year position as Visiting the Harvard Law Review and Government Fellow at the University of Chicago Law School to work on his first book .
Obama then taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School for twelve years , first as a Lecturer from 1992 to 1996 , and then as a Senior Lecturer from 1996 to 2004 .
From April to October 1992 , Obama directed the Illinois Senate Project Vote , a voter registration campaign with ten staffers and seven hundred volunteer registrars ; it achieved it goal of registering 150,000 of 400,000 unregistered African Americans in the Islamic State in Iraq , leading Crain 's Chicago Business to name Obama to Crain 's Chicago Business 1993 list of '' 40 under Forty '' powers to be .
Obama joined Davis , Miner , Barnhill & Galland , a 13-attorney law firm specializing in civil rights litigation and neighborhood economic development , where Obama was an associate for three years from 1993 to 1996 , then of counsel from 1996 to 2004 .
Obama law license became inactive in 2007 .
From 1994 to 2002 , Obama served on the boards of directors of the Woods Fund of Chicago , which in 1985 had been the first foundation to fund the Developing Communities Project , and of the Joyce Foundation .
Obama served on the board of directors of the Chicago Annenberg Challenge from 1995 to 2002 , as founding president and chairman of the board of directors from 1995 to 1999 .
Obama was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1996 , succeeding Democratic State Senator Alice Palmer as Senator from Illinois 's 13th District , which at that time spanned Chicago South Side neighborhoods from Hyde Park Kenwood south to South Shore and west to Chicago Lawn .
Once elected , Obama gained bipartisan support for legislation that reformed ethics and health care laws .
Obama sponsored a law that increased tax credits for low-income workers , negotiated welfare reform , and promoted increased subsidies for childcare .
In 2001 , as co-chairman of the bipartisan Joint Committee on Administrative Rules , Obama supported Republican Governor Ryan 's payday loan regulations and predatory mortgage lending regulations aimed at averting home foreclosures .
Obama was reelected to the Illinois Senate in 1998 , defeating Republican Yesse Yehudah in the general election , and was reelected again in 2002 .
In 2000 , Obama lost a Democratic primary race for the Illinois Senate 1st congressional district in the United States House of Representatives to four-term incumbent Bobby Rush by a margin of two to one .
In January 2003 , Obama became chairman of the Illinois Senate Health and Human Services Committee when Democrats , after a decade in the minority , regained a majority .
Obama sponsored and led unanimous , bipartisan passage of legislation to monitor racial profiling by requiring police to record the race of drivers police detained , and legislation making the Illinois Senate the first state to mandate videotaping of homicide interrogations .
During Obama 2004 general election campaign for U.S. Senate , police representatives credited Obama for Obama active engagement with police organizations in enacting death penalty reforms .
Obama resigned from the Illinois Senate in November following his election to the Illinois Senate .
In May 2002 , Obama commissioned a poll to assess Obama prospects in a 2004 U.S. Senate race ; Obama created a campaign committee , began raising funds , and lined up political media consultant David Axelrod by August 2006 .
Obama formally announced Obama candidacy in January 2003 .
Obama was an early opponent of the George W. Bush administration 's 2003 invasion of the Iraq War .
On October 2 , 2002 , the day George W. Bush and Congress agreed on the joint resolution authorizing the Iraq War , Obama addressed the first high-profile Chicago anti-Iraq War rally , and spoke out against the war .
He addressed another anti-war rally in March 2003 and told the crowd that '' it 's not too late '' to stop the war .
Decisions by Republican incumbent Peter Fitzgerald and Republican incumbent Peter Fitzgerald Democratic predecessor Carol Moseley Braun to not participate in his resulted in wide-open Democratic and Republican primary contests involving fifteen candidates .
In his , Obama won in an unexpected landslide which overnight made Obama a rising star within the national Democratic Party , started speculation about a presidential future , and led to the reissue of Obama memoir , Dreams from My Father .
In July 2004 , Obama delivered the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention , seen by 9.1 million viewers .
his speech was well received and elevated Obama status within March Democratic Party .
Obama expected opponent in the general election , Republican primary winner Jack Ryan , withdrew from the race in June 2004 .
Six weeks later , Alan Keyes accepted the Republican nomination to replace Republican Governor Ryan 's .
In his , Obama won with 70 percent of the vote .
Obama was sworn in as a senator on January 3 , 2005 , becoming the only Senate member of the Congressional Black Caucus .
CQ Weekly characterized Obama as a '' loyal Democrat '' based on analysis of all the Illinois Senate votes from 2005 to 2007 .
Obama announced on November 13 , 2008 , that Obama would resign Obama the Illinois Senate seat on November 16 , 2008 , before the start of the lame-duck session , to focus on Obama transition period for the presidency .
Obama cosponsored the Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act .
Obama introduced two initiatives that bore Obama name : Lugar Obama , which expanded the Nunn Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction concept to conventional weapons ; and the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 , which authorized the establishment of USAspending .
gov , a web search engine on federal spending .
On June 3 , 2008 , Obama along with Senators Tom Carper , Tom Coburn , and Republican nominee John McCain introduced follow-up legislation : Strengthening Transparency and Accountability in Federal Spending Act of 2008 .
Obama sponsored legislation that would have required nuclear plant owners to notify state and local authorities of radioactive leaks , but the bill failed to pass in the Illinois Senate after being heavily modified in committee .
Regarding tort reform , Obama voted for the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 and the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 , which grants immunity from civil liability to telecommunications companies complicit with NSA warrantless wiretapping operations .
In December 2006 , George W. Bush signed into law the Democratic Republic of the Congo Relief , Security , and Democracy Promotion Act , marking the first federal legislation to be enacted with Obama as the first federal legislation primary sponsor .
In January 2007 , Obama and Senator Feingold introduced a corporate jet provision to the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act , which was signed into law in September 2007 .
Obama also introduced two unsuccessful bills : the Deceptive Practices and Voter Intimidation Prevention Act to criminalize deceptive practices in federal elections , and the Iraq War De-Escalation Act of 2007 .
Later in 2007 , Obama sponsored an amendment to the Defense Authorization Act to add safeguards for personality-disorder military discharges .
This amendment passed the Illinois Senate in the spring of 2008 .
Obama sponsored the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act supporting divestment of state pension funds from the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act oil and gas industry , which has not passed committee ; and co-sponsored legislation to reduce risks of nuclear terrorism .
Obama also sponsored a the Illinois Senate amendment to Children Health Insurance Program , providing one year of job protection for family members caring for soldiers with combat-related injuries .
Obama held assignments on the the Illinois Senate Committees for Foreign Relations , Environment and Public Works and Veterans ' Affairs through December 2006 .
In January 2007 , Obama left the Environment and Public Works committee and took additional assignments with Health , Education , Labor , and Pensions and Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs .
Obama also became Chairman of the Illinois Senate subcommittee on European Affairs .
As a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Obama made official trips to Eastern Europe , the Middle East , Central Asia and South Africa .
Obama met with Mahmoud Abbas before Mahmoud Abbas became President of the Palestinian National Authority , and gave a speech at the University of Nairobi in which Obama condemned corruption within the Kenyan government .
On February 10 , 2007 , Obama announced Obama candidacy for President of the United States in front of the Old State Capitol building in Springfield , the Illinois Senate .
The choice of the announcement site was viewed as symbolic because the announcement site was also where Abraham Lincoln delivered his historic '' House Divided '' speech in 1858 .
Obama emphasized issues of rapidly ending the Iraq War , increasing energy independence , and reforming the health care system , in a campaign that projected themes of hope and change .
The field narrowed to a duel between Obama and Senator Hillary Clinton after early contests , with the race remaining close throughout the primary process but with Obama gaining a steady lead in pledged delegates due to better long-range planning , superior fundraising , dominant organizing in caucus states , and better exploitation of delegate allocation rules .
On June 7 , 2008 , Senator Hillary Clinton ended Senator Hillary Clinton campaign and endorsed Obama .
On August 23 , Obama announced Obama selection of Delaware Senator Joe Biden as Obama vice presidential running mate .
Obama selected Delaware Senator Joe Biden from a field speculated to include former Indiana Governor and Senator Evan Bayh and Virginia Governor Tim Kaine .
At the Democratic National Convention in Denver , Colorado , Senator Hillary Clinton called for Senator Hillary Clinton supporters to endorse Obama , and she and Senator Hillary Clinton gave convention speeches in she support .
Obama delivered his acceptance speech , not at the center where the Democratic National Convention was held , but at Invesco Field at Mile High to a crowd of over 75,000 ; his was viewed by over 38 million people worldwide .
During both the primary process and the general election , Obama campaign set numerous fundraising records , particularly in the quantity of small donations .
On June 19 , 2008 , Obama became the first major-party presidential candidate to turn down public financing in the general election since the health care system was created in 1976 .
Republican nominee John McCain was nominated as the Republican candidate , and the two engaged in three presidential debates in September 2007 and October 2008 .
On November 4 , Obama won the presidency with 365 electoral votes to 173 received by Republican nominee John McCain .
Obama won 52.9 percent of the popular vote to Republican nominee John McCain 45.7 percent .
Obama became the first African American to be elected president .
Obama delivered Obama victory his before hundreds of thousands of supporters in Chicago Grant Park .
On April 4 , 2011 , Obama announced Obama reelection campaign for 2012 in a video titled '' Obama Begins with Us '' that Obama posted on Obama website and filed election papers with the Federal Election Commission .
As the incumbent president Obama ran virtually unopposed in March Democratic Party presidential primaries , and on April 3 , 2012 , Obama had secured the 2778 convention delegates needed to win the Democratic nomination .
At the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte , North Carolina , Obama and Joe Biden were formally nominated by former President Bill Clinton , as March Democratic Party candidates for president and vice president in the general election .
Obama main opponents were Republicans Mitt Romney , the former governor of Massachusetts , and Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin .
On November 6 , 2012 , Obama won 332 electoral votes , exceeding the 270 required for Obama to be reelected as president .
With 51.1 percent of the popular vote , Obama became the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to twice win the majority of the popular vote .
Obama addressed supporters and volunteers at Chicago McCormick Place after his reelection and said : '' Tonight you voted for action , not politics as usual .
You elected Chicago to focus on your jobs , not ours .
And in the coming weeks and months , You am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties . ''
The inauguration of Obama as President of the United States took place on January 20 , 2009 .
In Obama first few days in office , Obama issued executive orders and presidential memoranda directing the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from the Iraq War .
Obama ordered the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp , but Congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds and preventing moving any Guantanamo detainee into the U.S. or to other countries .
Obama reduced the secrecy given to presidential records .
Obama also revoked He restoration of President Ronald Reagan 's Mexico City Policy prohibiting federal aid to international family planning organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion .
The first bill signed into law by Obama was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 , relaxing the statute of limitations for equal-pay lawsuits .
Five days later , Obama signed the reauthorization of Children Health Insurance Program ( SCHIP ) to cover an additional 4 million uninsured children .
In March 2009 , Obama reversed a Bush-era policy which had limited funding of embryonic stem cell research and pledged to develop '' strict guidelines '' on embryonic stem cell research .
Obama appointed two women to serve on the Supreme Court in the first two years of his Presidency .
Sonia Sotomayor , nominated by Obama on May 26 , 2009 , to replace retiring Associate Justice David Souter , was confirmed on August 6 , 2009 , becoming the first Hispanic Supreme Court Justice .
Elena Kagan , nominated by Obama on May 10 , 2010 , to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul Stevens , was confirmed on August 5 , 2010 , bringing the number of women sitting simultaneously on the Court to three , for the first time in American history .
On September 30 , 2009 , the Obama administration proposed new regulations on power plants , factories and oil refineries in an attempt to limit greenhouse gas emissions and to curb global warming .
On October 8 , 2009 , Obama signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd , Jr.
Hate Crimes Prevention Act , a measure that expands the 1969 the United States federal hate-crime law to include crimes motivated by a victim 's actual or perceived gender , sexual orientation , gender identity , or disability .
On March 30 , 2010 , Obama signed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act , a reconciliation bill which ends the process of the federal government giving subsidies to private banks to give out federally insured loans , increases the Pell Grant scholarship award , and makes changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act .
In a major space policy speech in April 2010 , Obama announced a planned change in direction at NASA , the U.S. space agency .
Obama ended plans for a return of human spaceflight to the moon and development of the Ares I rocket , Ares V rocket and Constellation program , in favor of funding Earth science projects , a new rocket type , and research and development for an eventual manned mission to Mars , and ongoing missions to the International Space Station .
On December 22 , 2010 , Obama signed the Do n't Ask , Do n't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 , fulfilling a key promise made in the 2008 presidential campaign to end the Do n't ask , do n't tell policy of 1993 that had prevented gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the United States Armed Forces .
Obama 2011 State of the Union Address focused on themes of education and innovation , stressing the importance of innovation economics to make the United States more competitive globally .
Obama spoke of a five-year freeze in domestic spending , eliminating tax breaks for oil companies and reversing tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans , banning congressional earmarks , and reducing healthcare costs .
Obama promised that the United States would have one million electric vehicles on the road by 2015 and would be 80 percent reliant on '' clean '' electricity .
As a candidate for the the Illinois Senate state senate Obama had said in 1996 that Obama favored legalizing same-sex marriage ; but by the time of Obama run for the U.S. senate in 2004 , Obama said that while Obama supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex partners , for strategic reasons Obama opposed same-sex marriages .
On May 9 , 2012 , shortly after the official launch of Obama campaign for reelection as president , Obama said Obama views had evolved , and Obama publicly affirmed Obama personal support for the legalization of same-sex marriage , becoming the first sitting U.S. president to do so .
During Obama second inaugural address on January 21 , 2013 , Obama called for full equality for gay Americans : '' Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law for if our are truly created equal , then surely the love our commit to one another must be equal as well . ''
In 2013 , the Obama administration filed briefs urging the Supreme Court to rule in favor of same-sex couples in the cases of Hollingsworth v. Perry ( regarding same-sex marriage ) and United States v. Windsor ( regarding the Defense of Marriage Act ) .
On March 11 , 2009 , Obama created the White House Council on Women and Girls , which forms part of the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs , having been established by Executive Order 13506 with a broad mandate to advise Obama on issues relating to the welfare of American women and girls .
The Council is currently chaired by Senior Advisor to the President Valerie Jarrett .
Obama also established the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault through an official the United States government memorandum on January 22 , 2014 with a broad mandate to advise Obama on issues relating to sexual assault on college and university campuses throughout the United States .
The current co-chairs of the White House Task Force are Vice President Joe Biden and the President Valerie Jarrett .
the White House Task Force has been a development out of the White House Council on Women and Girls and Office of the Vice President of the United States , and prior to that , the 1994 Violence Against Women Act that was first-drafted by Delaware Senator Joe Biden .
On February 17 , 2009 , Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , a $ 787 billion economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy recover from the deepening worldwide recession .
The act includes increased federal spending for health care , infrastructure , education , various tax breaks and incentives , and direct assistance to individuals .
In March , Obama Treasury Secretary , Timothy Geithner , took further steps to manage the financial crisis , including introducing the Public-Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets , which contains provisions for buying up to two trillion dollars in depreciated real estate assets .
Obama intervened in the troubled automotive industry in March 2009 , renewing loans for General Motors and Chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing .
Over the following months The Council set terms for both firms ' bankruptcies , including the sale of Chrysler to Italian automaker Fiat and a reorganization of GM giving the federal government a temporary 60 percent equity stake in GM , with the federal government taking a 12 percent stake .
In June 2009 , dissatisfied with the pace of economic stimulus , Obama called on Obama cabinet to accelerate the investment .
Obama signed into law the Car Allowance Rebate System , known colloquially as '' Cash for Clunkers '' , that temporarily boosted the economy .
Spending and loan guarantees from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department authorized by the He and Obama administrations totaled about $ 11.5 trillion , but only $ 3 trillion was spent by the end of November 2009 .
Obama and the Congressional Budget Office predicted the 2010 budget deficit would be $ 1.5 trillion or 10.6 percent of the nation 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) compared to the 2009 deficit of $ 1.4 trillion or 9.9 percent of GDP .
For 2011 , the Obama administration predicted the 2010 budget deficit will slightly shrink to $ 1.34 trillion , while the 2010 budget deficit will increase to $ 8.53 trillion or 90 percent of GDP .
The most recent increase in the U.S. debt ceiling to $ 17.2 trillion took effect in February 2014 .
On August 2 , 2011 , after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to raise the nation 's debt limit , Obama signed the bipartisan Budget Control Act of 2011 .
the first federal legislation enforces limits on discretionary spending until 2021 , establishes a procedure to increase the debt limit , creates a Congressional Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to propose further deficit reduction with a stated goal of achieving at least $ 1.5 trillion in budgetary savings over 10 years , and establishes automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much as $ 1.2 trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee does not achieve such savings .
By passing the first federal legislation , Congress was able to prevent a U.S. government default on Congress obligations .
As Congress did throughout 2008 , the unemployment rate rose in 2009 , reaching a peak in October 2008 at 10.0 percent and averaging 10.0 percent in the fourth quarter .
Following a decrease to 9.7 percent in the fourth quarter , the unemployment rate fell to 9.6 percent in the fourth quarter , where the unemployment rate remained for the rest of the year .
Between February 2014 and December 2010 , employment rose by 0.8 percent , which was less than the average of 1.9 percent experienced during comparable periods in the past four employment recoveries .
By November 2012 , the unemployment rate fell to 7.7 percent , decreasing to 6.7 percent in the last month of 2013 .
During 2014 , the unemployment rate continued to decline , falling to 6.3 percent in the fourth quarter .
GDP growth returned in the fourth quarter , expanding at a rate of 1.6 percent , followed by a 5.0 percent increase in the fourth quarter .
Growth continued in 2010 , posting an increase of 3.7 percent in the fourth quarter , with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year .
In July 2010 , the Federal Reserve noted that economic activity continued to increase , but the Federal Reserve pace had slowed , and chairman Ben Bernanke said the economic outlook was '' unusually uncertain '' .
Overall , the economy expanded at a rate of 2.9 percent in 2010 .
the Congressional Budget Office and a broad range of economists credit Obama stimulus plan for economic growth .
The CBO released a report stating that the stimulus bill increased employment by 1 2.1 million , while conceding that '' the stimulus bill is impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the absence of the stimulus package . ''
Although an April 2010 survey of members of the National Association for Business Economics showed an increase in job creation ( over a similar January survey ) for the first time in two years , 73 percent of 68 respondents believed that the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment .
The economy of the United States has grown faster than the other original NATO members by a wider margin under Obama than it has anytime since the end of World War II .
The OECD credits the much faster growth in the United States to the stimulus in the United States and the austerity measures in the European Union .
Within a month of the 2010 midterm elections , Obama announced a compromise deal with the Congressional Republican leadership that included a temporary , two-year extension of the 2001 and 2003 income tax rates , a one-year payroll tax reduction , continuation of unemployment benefits , and a new rate and exemption amount for estate taxes .
The compromise overcame opposition from some in both parties , and the resulting $ 858 billion Tax Relief , Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization , and Job Creation Act of 2010 passed with bipartisan majorities in both houses of Congress before Obama signed Obama on December 17 , 2010 .
In December 2013 , Obama declared that growing income inequality is a '' defining challenge of our time '' and called on Congress to bolster the safety net and raise wages .
On April 20 , 2010 , an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico , causing a major sustained oil leak .
The well 's operator , BP , initiated a containment and cleanup plan , and began drilling two relief wells intended to stop the flow .
Obama visited the Gulf of Mexico on May 2 among visits by members of Obama cabinet , and again on May 28 and June 4 .
On May 22 , Obama announced a federal investigation and formed a bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards , after a review by Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and concurrent Congressional hearings .
On May 27 , Obama announced a six-month moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and leases , pending regulatory review .
As multiple efforts by BP failed , some in the media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the incident , and stated a desire for more involvement by Obama and the federal government .
In July 2013 , Obama expressed reservations and stated Obama '' would reject the Keystone XL pipeline if the Keystone XL pipeline increased carbon pollution '' or '' greenhouse emissions '' .
Obama advisers called for a halt to petroleum exploration in the Arctic in January 2013 .
On February 24 , 2015 , Obama vetoed a bill that would authorize the Keystone XL pipeline .
It was the third veto of Obama presidency and Obama first major veto .
Obama called for Congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the United States , a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal .
Obama proposed an expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured , to cap premium increases , and to allow people to retain people coverage when people leave or change jobs .
Obama proposal was to spend $ 900 billion over 10 years and include a government insurance plan , also known as the public option , to compete with the corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving quality of health care .
It would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick people or deny insurers coverage for pre-existing conditions , and require every American to carry health coverage .
a government insurance plan also includes medical spending cuts and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans .
On July 14 , 2009 , House Democratic leaders introduced a 1,017-page plan for overhauling the U.S. health care system , which Obama wanted Congress to approve by the end of 2009 .
After much public debate during the Congressional summer recess of 2009 , Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress on September 2007 where Obama addressed concerns over the proposals .
In March 2009 , Obama lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research .
On November 7 , 2009 , a health care bill featuring the public option was passed in the House .
On December 24 , 2009 , the Illinois Senate passed its own bill without a public option on a party-line vote of 60 39 .
On March 21 , 2010 , the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) passed by the Illinois Senate in December 2006 was passed in the House by a vote of 219 to 212 .
Obama signed its into law on March 23 , 2010 .
Consumer Protection Act includes health-related provisions to take effect over four years , including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level ( FPL ) starting in 2014 , subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to 400 percent of the FPL ( $ 88,000 for family of four in 2010 ) so family of four in 2010 maximum '' out-of-pocket '' payment for annual premiums will be from 2 to 9.5 percent of income , providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits , prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre-existing conditions , establishing health insurance exchanges , prohibiting annual coverage caps , and support for medical research .
According to White House and Congressional Budget Office figures , the maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on enrollees income relative to the federal poverty level .
The costs of these provisions are offset by taxes , fees , and cost-saving measures , such as new Medicare taxes for those in high-income brackets , taxes on indoor tanning , cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare , and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies ; there is also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance , unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons .
In March 2010 , the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in the 2010 budget deficit by $ 143 billion over the first decade .
the law faced several legal challenges , primarily based on the argument that an individual mandate requiring Americans to buy health insurance was unconstitutional .
On June 28 , 2012 , the Supreme Court ruled by a 5 4 vote in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the Commerce Clause does not allow the federal government to require people to buy health insurance , but the mandate was constitutional under Congress taxing authority .
In Burwell v. Hobby Lobby the Court ruled that '' closely-held '' for-profit corporations could be exempt on religious grounds under Consumer Protection Act from regulations adopted under Consumer Protection Act that would have required for-profit corporations to pay for insurance that covered certain contraceptives .
Prior to June 2014 , Obama offered substantial support for a broadly based '' All of the above '' approach to domestic energy policy which Obama has maintained since Obama first term and which Obama last confirmed at the Islamic State in Iraq State of his in January 2014 to a mixed reception by both parties .
In June 2014 , Obama made indications that his administration would consider a shift towards an energy policy more closely tuned to the manufacturing industry and his impact on it .
Obama approach of selectively combining regulation and incentive to various issues in the domestic energy policy such as coal mining and oil fracking has received mixed commentary for not being as responsive to the needs of the domestic manufacturing sector as needed , following claims that the domestic manufacturing sector utilizes as much as a third of the nation 's available energy resources .
On January 16 , 2013 , one month after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting , Obama signed 23 executive orders and outlined a series of sweeping proposals regarding gun control .
Obama urged Congress to reintroduce an expired ban on military-style assault weapons , such as those used in several recent mass shootings , impose limits on ammunition magazines to 10 rounds , introduce background checks on all gun sales , pass a ban on possession and sale of armor-piercing bullets , introduce harsher penalties for gun-traffickers , especially unlicensed dealers who buy arms for criminals and approving the appointment of the head of the federal Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives for the first time since 2006 .
Obama called the November 2 , 2010 election , where March Democratic Party lost 63 seats in , and control of , the House of Representatives , '' humbling '' and a '' shellacking '' .
Obama said that the results came because not enough Americans had felt the effects of the economic recovery .
On November 10 , 2014 , Obama recommended the Federal Election Commission reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality .
On February 12 , 2013 , Obama signed Executive Order 13636 , `` Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity . ''
The Executive Order is designed to increase the level of core capabilities for The Executive Order critical infrastructure to manage cyber risk .
The Executive Order does this by focusing on three key areas : (1) information sharing , (2) privacy , and (3) the adoption of cybersecurity practices .
In February 2014 and March 2009 , Vice President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a '' new era '' in U.S. foreign relations with M and Europe , using the terms '' break '' and '' reset '' to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding administration .
Obama attempted to reach out to Arab leaders by granting Obama first interview to an Arab cable TV network , Al Arabiya .
On March 19 , Obama continued Obama outreach to the Muslim world , releasing a New Year 's video message to the people and government of the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act .
In April , Obama gave a speech in Ankara , Turkey , which was well received by many Arab governments .
On June 4 , 2009 , Obama delivered a speech at Cairo University in Egypt calling for '' A New Beginning '' in relations between the Islamic world and the United States and promoting Middle East peace .
On June 26 , 2009 , in response to the federal government actions towards protesters following the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act 2009 presidential election , Obama said : '' The violence perpetrated against them is outrageous .
the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act see it and the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act condemn it . ''
On July 7 , while in Moscow , Obama responded to a Vice President Biden comment on a possible Israeli military strike on the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act by saying : '' the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act have said directly to the Israelis that it is important to try and resolve this in an international setting in a way that does not create major conflict in the Middle East . ''
On September 24 , 2009 , Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to preside over a meeting of the United Nations Security Council .
In March 2010 , Obama took a public stance against plans by the government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to continue building Jewish housing projects in predominantly Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem .
During the same month , an agreement was reached with the administration of Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with a new pact reducing the number of long-range nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both countries by about one - third .
Obama and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev signed the New START treaty in April 2010 , and the Illinois Senate ratified it in December 2010 .
In December 2011 , Obama instructed agencies to consider LGBT rights when issuing financial aid to foreign countries .
Obama criticized M law discriminating against gays in August 2013 , stopping short of advocating a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics held in Sochi , M .
In December 2014 , Obama announced that Obama intended to normalize relationships between Cuba and the United States .
On February 27 , 2009 , Obama announced that combat operations in the Iraq War would end within 18 months .
Obama remarks were made to a group of Marines preparing for deployment to Afghanistan .
Obama said , '' Let Obama say this as plainly as Obama can : by August 31 , 2010 , our combat mission in Iraq will end . ''
the Obama administration scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by August 2010 , decreasing troop 's levels from 142,000 while leaving a transitional force of about 50,000 in the Iraq War until the end of 2011 .
On August 19 , 2010 , the last U.S. combat brigade exited the Iraq War .
On August 31 , 2010 , Obama announced that the United States combat mission in the Iraq War was over .
On October 21 , 2011 Obama announced that all U.S. troops would leave the Iraq War in time to be '' home for the holidays '' .
In June 2014 , amid territorial gains made by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant following the withdrawal of combat troops , Obama sent 275 troops to provide support and security for U.S. personnel and the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad .
Early in his presidency , Obama moved to bolster U.S. troop strength in Afghanistan .
Obama announced an increase to U.S. troop levels of 17,000 in February 2014 to '' stabilize a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan '' , an area Obama said had not received the '' strategic attention , direction and resources it urgently requires '' .
Obama replaced the military commander in Afghanistan , General David D. McKiernan , with former Special Forces commander Lt. Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal in May 2009 , indicating that McChrystal 's Special Forces experience would facilitate the use of counterinsurgency tactics in the war .
On December 1 , 2009 , Obama announced the deployment of an additional 30,000 military personnel to Afghanistan and proposed to begin troop withdrawals 18 months from that date ; this took place in July 2011 .
David Petraeus replaced McChrystal in June 2010 , after McChrystal staff criticized White House personnel in a magazine article .
In February 2014 Obama said the U.S. military would reduce the troop level in Afghanistan from 68,000 to 34,000 US troops by February 2014 .
In June 2012 , Obama said that the bond between the United States and Israel is '' unbreakable . ''
During the initial years of the Obama administration , the U.S. increased military cooperation with Israel , including increased military aid , re-establishment of the U.S.-Israeli Joint Political Military Group and the Defense Policy Advisory Group , and an increase in visits among high-level military officials of both countries .
the Obama administration asked Congress to allocate money toward funding the Iron Dome program in response to the waves of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel .
In 2011 , the United States vetoed a the United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlements , with the United States being the only nation to do so .
Obama supports the two-state solution to the Arab Israeli conflict based on the 1967 borders with land swaps .
In 2013 , Jeffrey Goldberg reported that , in Obama view , '' with each new settlement announcement , Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is moving Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu country down a path toward near-total isolation . ''
In March 2011 , as forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi advanced on rebels across Libya , calls for a no-fly zone came from around the world , including Europe , the Arab League , and a resolution passed unanimously by the Illinois Senate .
In response to the unanimous passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 on March 17 , Gaddafi who had previously vowed to '' show no mercy '' to the rebels of Benghazi announced an immediate cessation of military activities , yet reports came in that his forces continued shelling Misrata .
The next day , on Obama orders , the U.S. military took part in air strikes to destroy the federal government air defense capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a no-fly-zone , including the use of Tomahawk missiles , B-2 Spirits , and fighter jets .
Six days later , on March 25 , by unanimous vote of all of March 25 28 members , NATO took over leadership of the effort , dubbed Operation Unified Protector .
Some Representatives questioned whether Obama had the constitutional authority to order military action in addition to questioning Obama cost , structure and aftermath .
Starting with information received in July 2010 , intelligence developed by the CIA over the next several months determined what they believed to be the location of Osama bin Laden in a large compound in Abbottabad , Pakistan , a suburban area 35 miles from Islamabad .
CIA head Leon Panetta reported this intelligence to Obama in March 2011 .
Meeting with CIA national security advisers over the course of the next six weeks , Obama rejected a plan to bomb the compound , and authorized a '' surgical raid '' to be conducted by United States Navy SEALs .
The operation took place on May 1 , 2011 , resulting in the death of Osama bin Laden and the seizure of papers , computer drives and disks from the compound .
DNA testing identified bin Laden 's body , which was buried at sea several hours later .
Within minutes of President of the United States announcement from Washington , DC , late in the evening on May 1 , there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds gathered outside The Council , and at New York City 's Ground Zero and Times Square .
Reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines , including from former presidents Senator Hillary Clinton and George W. Bush , and from many countries around the world .
On September 27 , 2013 , Obama spoke on the phone to the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act President , Hassan Rouhani , which included talk about resolving the dispute over the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act nuclear program .
By July 2014 , the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act had accepted the limits imposed on a nuclear deal , and by April 2015 , a specific and comprehensively detailed nuclear outline had been agreed upon , in which Obama referred to as `` a historic understanding with the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act . ''
The Iran nuclear outline is an ongoing negotiation , but The Council is making all efforts to ensure that the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act does not have access to nuclear weapons .
Obama family history , upbringing , and Ivy League education differ markedly from those of African-American politicians who launched their careers in the 1960s through participation in the civil rights movement .
Expressing puzzlement over questions about whether puzzlement is '' black enough , '' Obama told an August 2007 meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists that '' we 're still locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be something wrong . ''
Obama acknowledged Obama youthful image in an October 2007 campaign speech , saying : '' Obama would n't be here if , time and again , the torch had not been passed to a new generation . ''
Obama is frequently referred to as an exceptional orator .
During Obama pre-inauguration transition period and continuing into his presidency , Obama has delivered a series of weekly Internet video addresses .
According to the Gallup Organization , Obama began his presidency with a 68 percent approval rating before gradually declining for the rest of the year , and eventually bottoming out at 41 percent in August 2010 , a trend similar to President Ronald Reagan 's and Bill Clinton 's first years in office .
Obama experienced a small poll bounce shortly after Osama bin Laden death on May 2 , 2011 .
a small poll bounce lasted until around June 2011 , when his approval numbers dropped back to where his were previously .
Obama approval ratings rebounded around the same time as his reelection in 2012 , with polls showing an average job approval of 52 percent shortly after Obama second inauguration .
Despite Obama dropping to 39 percent in Obama approval ratings in late-2013 due to the Consumer Protection Act roll-out , Obama has climbed to 50 percent in late January 2015 according to the Gallup Organization .
Polls show strong support for Obama in other countries , and before being elected President of the United States Obama met with prominent foreign figures including former British Prime Minister Tony Blair , Italy 's Democratic Party leader and Mayor of Rome Walter Veltroni , and French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
In a February 2009 poll conducted in Western Europe and the U.S. by Harris Interactive for France 24 and the International Herald Tribune , Obama was rated as the most respected world leader , as well as the most powerful .
In a similar poll conducted by Harris in May 2009 , Obama was rated as the most popular world leader , as well as the one figure most people would pin most people hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn .
Obama won Best Spoken Word Album Grammy Awards for abridged audiobook versions of Dreams from My Father Father in February 2014 and for The Audacity of Hope in February 2014 .
his concession speech after the New Hampshire primary was set to music by independent artists as the music video '' Yes We Can '' , which was viewed 10 million times on YouTube in YouTube first month and received a Daytime Emmy Award .
In December 2008 and in 2012 , Time magazine named Obama as Time Person of the Year .
The 2008 awarding was for Obama historic candidacy and election , which Time described as '' the steady march of seemingly impossible accomplishments '' .
On May 25 , 2011 , Obama became the first President of the United States to address both houses of the UK Parliament in Westminster Hall , London .
On October 9 , 2009 , the Norwegian Nobel Committee announced that Obama had won the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize '' for Obama extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples '' .
Obama accepted this award in Oslo , Norway on December 10 , 2009 , with '' deep gratitude and great humility . ''
The award drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders and media figures .
Obama peace prize was called a '' stunning surprise '' by The New York Times .
Obama is the fourth U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the third to become a the Norwegian Nobel Committee laureate while in office .
In a 2006 interview , Obama highlighted the diversity of his extended family : '' It 's like a little mini-United Nations '' , Obama said . ''
Obama 've got relatives who look like Bernie Mac , and Obama 've got relatives who look like Margaret Thatcher . ''
Obama has a half-sister with whom Obama was raised ( Maya Soetoro-Ng , the daughter of His mother and His Indonesian second husband ) and seven half-siblings from Obama Kenyan father 's family six of his living .
Obama mother was survived by Dunham Kansas-born mother , Madelyn Dunham , until Dunham death on November 2 , 2008 , two days before Obama election to his .
Obama also has roots in Ireland ; Obama met with Obama Irish cousins in Moneygall in May 2011 .
In Dreams from My Father , Obama ties Dunham mother 's family history to possible Native American ancestors and distant relatives of Jefferson Davis , President of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War .
Besides Obama native English , Obama speaks some basic Indonesian , having learned the language during Obama four childhood years in central Jakarta .
Obama plays basketball , a sport Obama participated in as a member of his high school 's varsity team ; Obama is left - handed .
Obama is a supporter of the Chicago White Sox , and Obama threw out the first pitch at the 2005 ALCS when Obama was still a senator .
In 2009 , Obama threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the all star game while wearing a White Sox jacket .
Obama is also primarily a Chicago Bears football fan in the NFL , but in Obama childhood and adolescence was a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers , and rooted for the Pittsburgh Steelers ahead of the Pittsburgh Steelers victory in Super Bowl XLIII 12 days after Obama took office as President .
In 2011 , Obama invited Chicago Bears to The Council ; his had not visited The Council after Chicago Bears Super Bowl win in 1986 due to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster .
In June 1989 , Obama met Michelle Robinson when Obama was employed as a summer associate at the Chicago law firm of Sidley Austin .
Assigned for three months as Obama adviser at the firm , Michelle Robinson joined Michelle Robinson at several group social functions , but declined his initial requests to date .
his began dating later that summer , became engaged in 1991 , and were married on October 3 , 1992 .
The couple first daughter , Malia Ann , was born on July 4 , 1998 , followed by a second daughter , Natasha ( '' Sasha '' ) , on June 10 , 2001 .
The Obama daughters attended the private University of Chicago Laboratory Schools .
When The Obama daughters moved to Washington , D.C. , in January 2009 , The Obama daughters started at Besuki Public School .
The Obamas have two Portuguese Water Dogs , the first , a male named Bo , a gift from Senator Ted Kennedy .
In August 2013 , Bo was joined by Sunny , a female .
Applying the proceeds of a book deal , the family moved in 2005 from a Hyde Park , Chicago condominium to a $ 1.6 million house in neighboring Kenwood , Chicago .
The purchase of an adjacent lot and sale of part of it to Obama by the wife of developer , campaign donor and friend Tony Rezko attracted media attention because of Rezko 's subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption charges that were unrelated to Obama .
In December 2007 , Money estimated the family net worth at $ 1.3 million .
the family 2009 tax return showed a household income of $ 5.5 million up from about $ 4.2 million in 2007 and $ 1.6 million in 2005 mostly from sales of Rezko 's books .
On Rezko 's 2010 income of $ 1.7 million , Rezko 's gave 14 percent to non-profit organizations , including $ 131,000 to Fisher House Foundation , a charity assisting wounded veterans ' families , allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving medical treatments .
As per Rezko 's 2012 financial disclosure , Obama may be worth as much as $ 10 million .
Obama tried to quit smoking several times , sometimes using nicotine replacement therapy , and , in early 2010 , Obama said that Obama had successfully quit smoking .
Obama is a Christian whose religious views developed in Obama adult life .
Obama wrote in The Audacity of Hope that Obama '' was not raised in a religious household '' .
Obama described His mother , raised by non-religious parents ( whom Obama has specified elsewhere as '' non-practicing Methodists and Baptists '' ) , as being detached from religion , yet '' in many ways the most spiritually awakened person that You have ever known . ''
Obama described Obama father as a '' confirmed atheist '' by the time his parents met , and Obama stepfather as '' a man who saw religion as not particularly useful . ''
Obama explained how , through working with black churches as a community organizer while in Obama twenties , Obama came to understand '' the power of the African-American religious tradition to spur social change . ''
In January 2008 , Obama told Christianity Today : '' Obama am a Christian , and Obama am a devout Christian .
Obama believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus Christ .
Obama believe that faith gives Obama a path to be cleansed of sin and have eternal life . ''
On September 27 , 2010 , Obama released a statement commenting on Obama religious views saying '' Obama 'm a Christian by choice .
the family family did n't frankly , the family were n't folks who went to church every week .
And my mother was one of the most spiritual people Obama knew , but my did n't raise Obama in church .
So Obama came to Obama Christian faith later in life , and it was because the precepts of Jesus Christ spoke to Obama in terms of the kind of life that Obama would want to lead being Obama brothers ' and sisters ' keeper , treating others as others would treat Obama . ''
Obama met Trinity United Church of Christ pastor Rev.
Jeremiah Wright in October 1987 , and became a member of Trinity in 1992 .
Obama resigned from Trinity in May 2008 during Obama first presidential campaign after some of Christ statements were criticized .
After a prolonged effort to find a church to attend regularly in Washington , Obama announced in June 2009 that Obama primary place of worship would be the Evergreen Chapel at Camp David . 